# HashSet vs HashMap

- `HashSet` implements Set interface and works internally like HashMap, while `HashMap` implements the Map interface.
- The HashMap should be always preferred to use unless there is a need to maintain the uniqueness of elements in the Collection.
- We should prefer to use `HashSet` rather than `Hashmap` when we want to maintain the uniqueness in the Collection object. In all other cases, we should use HashMap over HashSet as its performance is better than HashSet.

## Data storage

- `HashSet` stores the data in the form of objects
- `HashMap` stores the data in the form of key-value pairs.

Example
```java
HashSet<String> hs = new HashSet<String>();
hs.add(“Java”);

HashMap<Integer, String> hm = new HashMap<Integer, String>();
hm.put(1, “Java”);
```

## Duplicate values
- `HashSet` does not allow you to add duplicate values.
- `HasMap` stores the key-value pairs and allows the duplicate keys but not duplicate values. If we add the duplicate key, then it uses the new value with that key.

## Null values
- `HashSet` allows a single null value; after adding a null value
- `HashSet` does not allow to add more null values. On the other hand, HashMap allows multiple null values but a single null key.

## Performance

- The speed of `HashSet` is slower than that of HashMap.
- The reason that HashMap is faster than HashSet is that the HashMap uses the unique keys to access the values. It stores each value with a corresponding key and we can retrieve these values faster using keys during iteration.
- While HashSet is completely based on objects and therefore retrieval of values is slower.