# HashSet

- `HashSet` is a collection framework that implements the `Set` interface and does not allow any duplicate values. 
- A HashSet is a collection of items where every item is unique, and it is found in the `java.util` package.
- All the objects stored in the HashSet must override the equals() and hashCode() methods so that we can check for duplicate values.
- The HashSet is not thread safe and is not synchronized. There is a method add() which adds elements in a HashSet.

Example:

Create a HashSet object called cars that will store strings:
```java
import java.util.HashSet; 

HashSet<String> cars = new HashSet<String>();
```

## Add Items
The HashSet class has many useful methods. For example, to add items to it, use the `add()` method:
Example

```java
import java.util.HashSet;

public class Main {

  public static void main(String[] args) {

    HashSet<String> cars = new HashSet<String>();
    cars.add("Volvo");
    cars.add("BMW");
    cars.add("Ford");
    cars.add("BMW");
    cars.add("Mazda");
    System.out.println(cars);
  }
}
```

Note: In the example above, even though BMW is added twice it only appears once in the set because every item in a set has to be unique.

## Check If an Item Exists
To check whether an item exists in a HashSet, use the `contains()` method:

Example

```java
cars.contains("Mazda");
```

## Remove an Item
To remove an item, use the `remove()` method:

Example:

```java
cars.remove("Volvo");
```

o remove all items, use the `clear()` method:
Example
```java
cars.clear();
```

## HashSet Size
To find out how many items there are, use the `size()` method:
Example
```java
cars.size();
```

## Loop - HashSet
Loop through the items of an HashSet with a for-each loop:
Example

```java
for (String i : cars) {
  System.out.println(i);
}
```

## Other Types

- Items in an HashSet are actually objects.
- In the examples above, we created items (objects) of type "String". Remember that a String in Java is an object (not a primitive type).
- To use other types, such as int, you must specify an equivalent wrapper class: Integer.
- For other primitive types, use: Boolean for boolean, Character for char, Double for double, etc:

Example

Use a HashSet that stores Integer objects:

```java
import java.util.HashSet;

public class Main {

  public static void main(String[] args) {

    HashSet<Integer> numbers = new HashSet<Integer>();
    numbers.add(4);
    numbers.add(7);
    numbers.add(8);

    for(int i = 1; i <= 10; i++) {
      if(numbers.contains(i)) {
        System.out.println(i + " was found in the set.");
      } else {
        System.out.println(i + " was not found in the set.");
      }
    }
  }
}
```